Data Ingestion (#49051)
dotnet/docs: docs/ai/conceptual/data-ingestion.md

---
title: Data ingestion
description: Introduction to data ingestion
author: luisquintanilla
ms.author: luquinta
ms.date: 11/11/2025
ms.topic: concept-article
ai-usage: ai-assisted
---

# Data Ingestion

> ## What is data ingestion?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Data ingestion
```

## Why data ingestion matters for AI applications

Imagine you're building a RAG-powered chatbot to help employees find information across your company's vast collection of documents. These documents might include PDFs, Word files, PowerPoint presentations, and web pages scattered across different systems.

Your chatbot needs to understand and search through thousands of documents to provide accurate, contextual answers. But raw documents aren't suitable for AI systems. You need to transform them into a format that preserves meaning while making them searchable and retrievable.

This is where data ingestion becomes critical. You need to extract text from different file formats, break large documents into smaller chunks that fit within AI model limits, enrich the content with metadata, generate embeddings for semantic search, and store everything in a way that enables fast retrieval. Each step requires careful consideration of how to preserve the original meaning and context.

## What is Microsoft.Extensions.DataIngestion?

> [Microsoft.Extensions.DataIngestion](https://www.nuget.org/packages/Microsoft.Extensions.DataIngestion) provides foundational .NET components for data ingestion. It enables developers to read, process, and prepare documents for AI and machine learning workflows, especially Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) scenarios.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [📦 Microsoft.Extensions.DataIngestion package](https://www.nuget.org/packages/Microsoft.Extensions.DataIngestion) provides foundational .NET components for data ingestion. It enables developers to read, process, and prepare documents for AI and machine learning workflows, especially Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) scenarios.
```

- **Production-ready storage:** Store processed chunks in popular vector databases and document stores, with support for embedding generation, making your pipelines ready for real-world scenarios.
- **End-to-end pipeline composition:** Chain together readers, processors, chunkers, and writers with the `IngestionPipeline` API, reducing boilerplate and making it easy to build, customize, and extend complete workflows.
- **Performance and scalability:** Designed for scalable data processing, these components can handle large volumes of data efficiently, making them suitable for enterprise-grade applications.

All of these components are open and extensible by design. You can add custom logic, new connectors, and extend the system to support emerging AI scenarios. By standardizing how documents are represented, processed, and stored, .NET developers can build reliable, scalable, and maintainable data pipelines without reinventing the wheel for every project.

### Building on stable foundations

![Data Ingestion Architecture Diagram](../media/data-ingestion/DataIngestion.png)

> These new data ingestion building blocks are built on top of proven and extensible components in the .NET ecosystem, ensuring reliability, interoperability, and seamless integration with existing AI workflows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These data ingestion building blocks are built on top of proven and extensible components in the .NET ecosystem, ensuring reliability, interoperability, and seamless integration with existing AI workflows:
```

Reviewer: "New" will get outdated easily.

## Data ingestion building blocks

The [Microsoft.Extensions.DataIngestion](https://www.nuget.org/packages/Microsoft.Extensions.DataIngestion) library is built around several key components that work together to create a complete data processing pipeline. Let's explore each component and how they fit together.

### Documents and Document Readers

At the foundation of the library is the `IngestionDocument` type, which provides a unified way to represent any file format without losing important information. The `IngestionDocument` is Markdown-centric because large language models work best with Markdown formatting.

The `IngestionDocumentReader` abstraction handles loading documents from various sources, whether local files or streams. A few readers are available:

- **[MarkItDown](https://www.nuget.org/packages/Microsoft.Extensions.DataIngestion.MarkItDown)**
- **[Markdown](https://www.nuget.org/packages/Microsoft.Extensions.DataIngestion.Markdig/)**

> We're actively working on adding more readers (including **LlamaParse** and **Azure Document Intelligence**).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
More readers (including **LlamaParse** and **Azure Document Intelligence**) will be added in the future.
```

```csharp
OpenAIClient openAIClient = new(
    new ApiKeyCredential(Environment.GetEnvironmentVariable("GITHUB_TOKEN")!),
    new OpenAIClientOptions { Endpoint = new Uri("https://models.github.ai/inference") });

IEmbeddingGenerator<string, Embedding<float>> embeddingGenerator =
    openAIClient.GetEmbeddingClient("text-embedding-3-small").AsIEmbeddingGenerator();

using SqliteVectorStore vectorStore = new(
    "Data Source=vectors.db;Pooling=false",
    new()
    {
        EmbeddingGenerator = embeddingGenerator
    });

// The writer requires the embedding dimension count to be specified.
// For OpenAI's `text-embedding-3-small`, the dimension count is 1536.
using VectorStoreWriter<string> writer = new(vectorStore, dimensionCount: 1536);
```

> ### Document Processing Pipeline

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Document processing pipeline
```
